# Nonlinearity

*A vast majority of radiometric, spectroscopic, imaging, and optical communication methods rely on comparing light intensity levels measured by a photonic detector. The measurement accuracy is impaired by any deviation from the linear response of the detector, which leads to systematic errors. We present a direct single-source method for absolute measurement of nonlinearity to characterize the response of an arbitrary single-photon detector, namely several actively and passively quenched single-photon avalanche diodes (SPADs) and superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors (SNSPDs). The presented method does not require a reference detector or calibrated attenuators. Neither does it employ time-resolved generation and detection. The method applies to any single-photon detector regardless of the detection technology. Contrary to general belief, dead time is not the only effect responsible for saturation of the SPADs; we discover supra-linear behavior of SPADs and show that it cannot be fully explained using known theoretical models. Furthermore, we explore the nonlinearity of SNSPDs for various values of bias current and identify super- and sub-linear behavior caused by the interplay of recovery processes, latching, and two-photon sensitivity. Because of single-photon detector complex working principles, the direct absolute measurement of nonlinearity is the preferred way how to analyze the detector response.*


*Data availability:*

(a) Nonlinearity: Raw data used to produce all experimental figures in the manuscript (Figs. 3 and 4) are available in folders *SPADs* and *SNSPD*. Speciffic datasets are arranged in the three columns: detection rate recorded for the beam A, for the beam B, and for both beams simultaneously impinging the detector AB. Each illumination level is repeated 30 times. Measurement time was set to 20 s.

(b) Relative Allan deviation: Data from stability measurement and Python script to calculate relative Allan deviation are avaible in the folder *Stability*
